okay so
we're going to continue with our
discussion of the derivative
so
now let me recall
the definition we introduced at the end
of last time of the derivative so let i
be an interval meaning it could be of
the it could be open closed it could go
out to plus infinity it could go out to
minus infinity
but you know what an interval is
and let's take a function from that
interval to r
so we say f is differentiable at a point
c and i
if this limit of uh
f of x minus f of c over x minus c this
difference quotient uh if this limit
exists this if this limit exists we also
denote it by f prime of c
okay
and last time we showed that uh
um
we gave a
simple example that
from last time that if f of x equals
alpha times x to the n
then
this function is differentiable at every
c and its derivative is equal to n times
alpha x
c to the n minus one
okay
all right now
let's uh
state this in
an equivalent way using sequences
remember we had this characterization of
limits
um of functions and you know the
function we're kind of looking at is f
of x minus f of c over x minus c
we had this
equivalence between limits
and limits of sequences
from last time that the limit as let's
say g of x
as x goes to c equals l if and only if
for every sequence x of n converging to
c g of x of n converges to l as n goes
to infinity
so
we can restate uh what it means for a
function to be differentiable at a point
and its derivative to be l say
if and only if for every sequence x sub
n
uh with x sub n not equal to c for all n
and converging to c we have that l is
equal to this limit as n goes to
infinity of now this sequence of numbers
f of x n minus f of c over x of n
um minus c
okay
[Applause]
all right so
today
the
theme of today is
the connection between differentiability
and continuity okay
and we have kind of a very easy
implication which is that if
a function is differentiable at a point
then it must be continuous at that point
okay
um so that's a statement of this theorem
if f going from an interval to r is
differentiable at c
then f is also continuous at c
okay um
so
let me also add in here
that
continuity at the point c in an interval
is equivalent to saying that the limit
as x goes to c of f of x
equals f c
okay
now this is just a subtle point
that i want to make is that for an
interval
open closed half open half closed
whatever
any point in that interval is a cluster
point of that interval
and therefore you know this definition i
made up there is
is actually meaningful
and for continuity
something being continuous that c is
equivalent to
um if c is a cluster point which i just
said it is it always is this limit
equals the function evaluated at the
point all right so that's just kind of a
um
a subtle uh
comment i want to make
all right so how do we prove this
we write the limit as x goes to c of f
of x
as
in this way
so essentially what i do is i add and
subtract f c
and then the part that is f of x minus f
c i multiply uh by x minus c and divide
by x minus c which is perfectly fine
because remember for a limit i'm never
actually plug i'm never actually looking
at points where x equals c
okay um
so that's fine
and so i get this expression here
all right now what we know about limits
is that um
the limit of the sum is the sum of the
limits if they as long as every all
these limits exist
and the limit of the product is a
product of the limits again assuming all
of these limits exist
and the limit as x goes to c of
everything you see here
uh do exist so as x goes to c this thing
in brackets or in the
um
i guess these are brackets
i don't know what those are called um
this limit here is f prime of c as x
goes to c of x minus c that's just zero
and f of c is just a constant there's
nothing
changing with x so the limit of a
constant is that constant so i just get
f c
so the limit of this whole expression is
f prime of c times 0 plus f of c
which equals f of c so we've just proven
that the limit as x goes to c of f of x
is equal to f c
which is what we wish to prove okay
therefore a function which is
differentiable at a point
must be continuous at that point
okay
all right so as beginning
math students
we're learning proofs but we're also
learning questions all right what type
you know types of questions to ask
and whenever you come across a new
theorem that has one implication
um
one hypothesis uh hypothesis one uh
conclusion
then
you should ask yourself does the
converse hole does the
conclusion also imply the hypothesis so
we've shown that f differentiable at c
implies f is continuous at c so does the
converse hold namely if f is continuous
at a point
does this imply that f is differentiable
at that point
okay
and as you can see already there the
answer is no all right i think you've
probably covered this in calculus
um
but uh
what's the function that that gives this
counter example that is continuous at c
but not differentiable let's see well
let's
take for example c equals zero and let's
look at the function f of x equals the
absolute value of x
okay
then this function here this is
continuous at every point so in
particular at c equals zero but it's not
differentiable at c equals zero
okay
and how do you come up with uh and how
do you do that
you know how do you show something's not
differentiable
um the simplest way is to use this
remark up here by finding a sequence
converging to c so that the difference
quotient does not have a limit as n goes
to infinity
okay
um
so that's what we'll do here is we'll
find a sequence x sub n
uh
with x sub n not equal to zero for all n
converging to zero
such that uh this limit does not exist
okay
uh and rather than write that because
the limit does not exist it doesn't make
uh
really sense for me to even write that
let me write this as saying
as the sequence
is divergent
okay
now
how are we going to come up with the
sequence x sub n so that the difference
quotient does not uh converge
well what's the logic so for f of x
equals the absolute value of x
it looks like uh like this it looks like
x it's equal to x over here minus x over
here so if you were to formally
differentiate
um
well i mean you could
actually differentiate to the left of
zero you get the derivative is equal to
minus one
to the right the derivative is one
so
that kind of suggests maybe there's some
funny business going on at zero
so let's look at a sequence which
alternates between
being negative and positive but is
converging to 0 and see if that sequence
will
provide us with
you know this desired sequence which
results in the difference quotient being
divergent
so let's just take a guess
uh let x n be minus 1 to the n over n it
doesn't have to be this one just
something that alternates back and forth
would be enough
so this could be
n squared here or 2n or into the 2020
whatever you like
then this is clearly always non-zero
and it converges to zero
okay
and of course y converges to zero i mean
we you could prove this by epsilon m
definition but also you know
if i take the absolute value that's less
than or equal to
one over n and this one we know
converges to zero
zero so
by squeeze theorem the thing in the
middle must converge to zero
um
and we're done
okay so we have the sequence x sub n
equals minus 1 to the n over n
which is alternating back and forth
um and
we hope it's uh
going to result in this difference
quotient being divergent as n goes to
infinity
and so we compute that let's look at the
difference quotient f of x sub n minus f
of 0 f of 0 is just 0.
so i just get f of x sub n which is the
absolute value of minus 1 to the n over
n
over x sub n which is minus 1 to the n
over n
this is just equal to
so this is just equal to 1 over n over
minus 1 to the n over n
which equals
minus 1 to the minus n but
you know minus 1 to the minus and this
is equal to the same thing as -1 to the
n
all right
so
this
sequence here of
difference quotient so f of x n minus f
of 0 over x n minus 0 this is just equal
to
the sequence minus 1 to the n
which we know is divergent doesn't have
a limit that's one of the first
examples of a sequence we proved does
not converge
okay
so
in summary this function f of x equals
the absolute value of x
uh is continuous at c equals 0 but not
differentiable at c equals 0.
so now a natural question that people
asked is
okay so
a function being continuous at a point
does not necessarily imply
that it's differentiable but let's take
a function which is continuous on the
real number line
is there a point where uh
it's differentiable so it's already on
the board but
you know this is not completely
a crazy question to ask for example
let's go back to f of x equals the
absolute value of x
right this function is differentiable
everywhere except 0. so there's lots of
points where this function is
differentiable it's differentiable for c
positive and c negative so for this
continuous function
there does exist points where it's
differentiable and you can imagine
trying to draw any kind of curve that
you can on a piece of paper and you can
probably find a point on that curve that
has a tangent all
right i mean if you sit there with
pencil and then try to draw something
very jagged i mean there's still going
to be little you know sections of your
jagged curve where it has a tangent so
you know i imagine this is why people
thought this was the case that
a continuous function has to have at
least one point where it's
differentiable
and virus ross the
godfather of analysis said no he came up
with a whole class of examples
of functions which are
continuous
on the real number line
but are differentiable nowhere
okay
and this was a really surprising um
really surprising set of examples
and result to the community
and
you know to me
it's also one of the few results in this
class that you really
didn't see in you know your calculus
class so
we're going to go through this example
although in most analysis classes it's
reserved for later
but i think we can do it now
and so what we're going to prove is
so we're going to construct a function
which is continuous everywhere but is
differentiable nowhere so a continuous
nowhere differentiable function okay
and i'll even write write down
the function for you so what's the idea
that virustrust had it was
let me
well i'm not going to write down the
function just yet but the idea of the
constructing such a function is that it
should be highly oscillatory okay you
know
imagine again you're trying to draw a
picture of the graph of a function
that's nowhere differentiable you would
kind of sit there and break your pencil
trying to draw just kind of a
highly oscillating function so that it
never has a tangent
um
and that's and that's his idea uh is to
build a function which is highly
oscillatory
but
not also too oscillatory so that it's
still continuous at every point okay um
okay
so to start with the construction of
this function which is continuous but
nowhere differentiable we're going to
need a few
simple facts to start off with
so
what is so again
when we write out state our goal we're
going to construct
a
continuous function from r to r
which is
nowhere
differentiable
okay not differentiable it's
differentiable at no point
so let's start off with a
few uh simple facts about so i said that
we're going to build a function which is
very which is oscillating uh
quite a lot there's two functions you
know that oscillate cosine and sine
so
that's uh
those are going to be our building
blocks we'll choose one of them um let's
choose uh
um let's choose cosine say as to be our
building block but anyway so let's start
off with some elementary facts about
cosine
so
first is that for all x y and r
cosine x minus cosine y
is less than or equal to the absolute
value of x times x minus y
and the second is that
for every real number c
and
for all k natural number
there exists a y and c plus pi
over k c plus 3 pi over k
such that and let me label this as
theorem 1
such that
cosine of kc
that's funny minus cosine of
ky
is greater than or equal to one
okay
all right so
both of these are simple facts about
cosine uh
you know really this one just follows
from the angle
sum formula this one follows from the
periodicity of cosine
uh
but uh
so why are these true so first off we
did prove and maybe i should have used
sine and instead of cosine in all of
this but if you recall
from our
continuity section
we proved that
for all x and y
sine x minus sine y is less than or
equal to the absolute value of x minus y
for all x and y okay
and there is a simple relation between
cosine x
and
sine of something and that's just a
shift by pi over 2.
then
cosine of x minus
cosine of y
this is equal to sine
x plus pi over 2
minus sine
y plus pi over 2
and if you like let me instead of using
x and y here
let me use a and b
so then this is less than or equal to
x plus pi over 2 minus y plus pi over 2
using this inequality
okay
so that proves number one
for number two
it's just a simple fact about cosine
being a two pi periodic
so
function g of x equals
cosine k of x this is also periodic but
now what's the period it's
uh 2 pi over k
okay
and now this interval
has length two pi
except it's missing the point c plus pi
over two and c plus 3 pi over k
all right
thus if i look at
[Music]
if i look at the image of
okay
then so this function g of x equals
cosine k of x if i look at
uh
the image of this interval
this will contain
you know
all of the real numbers between minus
one and one
okay
you know so this is a period this is a
interval of length two pi over k
cosine kx is two pi over k periodic so i
should get everything between -1 and 1
except possibly the value at
the endpoints so
take away
and the value at the endpoints is
minus cosine
kc
okay
because cosine of
cosine of k times c plus pi is equal to
pi over k is equal to cosine of kc plus
pi
and cosine of something plus pi is equal
to minus cosine of that thing okay
all right so
uh the image of this set
by cosine kx contains everything between
minus one and one
except for possibly uh uh the end point
this really only happens at uh if cosine
of k times z equals
one
so
okay
then
if cosine of
kc is
bigger than or equal to zero
then we choose y in
this interval
c plus pi over k
c plus
3 pi over k
let's let's write it let's write it this
way so if this thing is bigger than or
equal to zero then we choose y
why am i confusing myself okay so this
is simple enough
we choose y in this interval so that
cosine of
ky equals minus one
and
if cosine kc is less than zero
then we choose
y so that
cosine of k y equals
1.
okay
so
you know again here's so forget
just to get an idea okay so
i'm quibbling over a minor point the
fact that we have to take away uh
possibly the point where
um
you know possibly the value of cosine kc
anyways
let's erase this for a minute and let's
imagine that the
range of this guy i mean it's a 2 pi
over k periodic uh interval you know so
this should basically cover all values
between -1 and 1.
so cosine of kc will either be plus or
minus so if it's
non-negative then i can find a y in this
interval since it's two pi over k
periodic so that cosine of k y equals
minus one
okay
and since this is non-negative and this
is equal to minus one the difference
between these two an absolute value will
be greater than or equal to 1.
okay
now if cosine of kc is
less than 0 then again since this
interval contains minus 1 to 1 it's 2 pi
over k periodic we choose a y so that
cosine of ky equals 1.
and then this is negative this is 1 so
the difference between something
negative and 1
is greater than or equal to 1.
all right
and that's the proof
i i made a kind of a mess of it but this
is you know
very easy to understand
um if you just you know draw a picture
really okay
all right so let's take uh
so let's continue
and again what what these two
you know
parts of this theorem say is that cosine
of
cosine can be quite oscillatory if you
you know insert a k here
right because you know the difference
between
this interval is actually you know quite
small right the length of this interval
is 2 pi over k if k is very large that's
a very small interval yet somehow we can
find two points which differ by at least
one
in value if we plug them into the
function
but cosine is not too wild because it
satisfies this bound so these two are
kind of gonna they're gonna be the
ingredients in that uh
um
you know idea i said at the start that
we're going to build a function which
oscillates which which is quite
oscillatory
but it's not too oscillatory that it's
still continuous
okay
and we're going to build our function
out of
cosine kx where k is going to be
changing okay
so i'm going to need one more
very simple fact so this one i won't
mess up too much
which is the following
for all a
b c and r
uh the absolute value of a plus b plus c
this is bigger than or equal to the
absolute value of a minus the absolute
value of v b minus the absolute value of
c
okay and the proof of this is just to
use the triangle inequality twice
we have the absolute value of a this is
equal to a plus b plus c
minus
b plus c
and this is less than or equal to
by the triangle inequality the absolute
value of a plus b plus c
plus the absolute value of minus times b
plus c but that minus goes away with the
absolute value
and then i use a triangle inequality one
more time here to get
okay and then if i subtract
oh i didn't want to do that
and so if i
subtract
this side over
to the other side of this inequality i
get uh
i get uh the statement of the theorem
all right
okay
so now we're going to introduce
call this derum 2.
now let me introduce
the guest of honor
so first
i have the following claim for all
x and r
the series given by sum from n equals 0
to infinity
and instead of n i'm going to use k
cosine
160 k x so here's our very oscillatory
guy
over
4 times to the k
is
absolutely convergent
all right so for each x and r this
series converges absolutely so it spits
out a real number so
i can define a function
uh in terms of this series
that f from r to r
b defined by f prime f of x is just the
number that i get
when i stick in x to the series
okay
which is meaningful because for all x
this series converges absolutely so this
is just a function i just put in x i get
out a real number then the claim is
f
is
bounded
and
continuous
okay so this is going to be our function
which is
um continuous but nowhere differentiable
all right it's as you can see it's built
out of
a bunch of very oscillatory uh functions
cosine of 160 kx this is just a really
big number here
and as i said when we were talking about
this theorem here
each one of those pieces is very
oscillatory on
you know a very small interval it
oscillates between
two values that differ by at least one
okay
and so all of these got all of these
guys are oscillatory and you know
they're oscillatory on smaller and
smaller intervals and somehow we're
adding them all up in a way to get a
function that's oscillatory on
arbitrarily small intervals and
therefore will not be differentiable
okay
so
the proof of one is very easy
we just used a comparison principle
cosine of 160
k
times x over 4 to the k this is less
than or equal to because cosine of no
matter what you plug in is bounded by 1
this is always bounded by 1 over 4 to
the k
right
and therefore by the comparison
principle
we get that
this series is
convergent and therefore
the original series is absolute
absolutely convergent
okay so each of these is bounded by 1
over 4 to the k
this series converges this is a
geometric series
therefore by the
comparison principle
the series converges
so now we have this function defined by
uh this series
okay
no this is not a power series because a
power series involves polynomials in x
this is cosine of x or a number times x
so let's show it's bounded
the the same proof actually that we gave
here shows it's bounded
but x being r
then
f of x equals
this is equal to
the limit as
m goes to infinity of this
sum and now
for absolute values this limit pulls out
right
whenever the limit exists
the limit of the absolute value equals
the absolute value of the limit
and this is less than or equal to the
limit as
m goes to infinity of bringing the abs
so by the triangle inequality this is
just a
finite sum so
i can bring the absolute values in and i
get sum from
a 0 to m
of cosine 160 k
x over 4 to the k
absolute value and this is less than or
equal to
limit as m goes to infinity
of some
k equals 0 to m
of
4 to the minus k again because cosine of
anything is bounded by 1.
and this equals uh
four thirds right this is just a sum
from k equals zero to infinity
of four to the minus k
all right so this function is always
bounded by four thirds
okay
all right so the function is bounded
let's now show it's continuous
so
to show a function's continuous remember
we have that
other characterization of continuity
that a function is continuous at a point
if and only if for every sequence
converging to that point
um
f of x n converges to f of c
so before i start writing all this down
let's see being r
and let x n be a sequence converging to
c so what we want to show
is that
limit as n goes to infinity
of f of x in minus f of c an absolute
value equals 0. all right that's the
same as saying the limit as n goes to
infinity of f x n equals f of c
all right
now
um
f is a bounded function so this sequence
f of x n minus f c and absolute uh is
um
an absolute value is a bounded sequence
so it has a limb soup
and we did an exercise on the assignment
that
the limit of a sequence equals zero if
and only if the limb soup
equals zero
so
equivalently we'll show
that
limb soup
of f of x sub n
minus f of
c equals zero all right this thing
always exists for a bounded sequence
okay
which is one of the reasons which
is what makes limb soup so
useful okay
is that they do always exist so if we
show that this limb soup equals zero
then this is equivalent to showing uh
this limit equals zero okay
again this was an exercise or you can
take it as you know the limb f of
something that's non-negative is always
bigger than or equal to zero so if we
show this is equal to zero we would have
zero is less than or equal to the length
m f of this thing is less than or equal
to the limb soup which equals zero and
therefore the limb equals the limb soup
equals 0.
okay so that's another way of
seeing that this is equivalent to this
all right so we're going to show this
at the limb soup of f of x sub n minus f
of c equals 0.
but um
we don't
so that might be a little tough but what
we can show um
and what we will show
is
we'll give ourselves a little room we'll
show that for all epsilon positive
the limb sup
of
f of x sub n minus
f of c which is a non-negative number
is less than epsilon
okay so this is a fixed number
non-negative number which is always
smaller than um
put less than or equal to there which is
smaller than any number that i want and
therefore it has to be zero
improving thus
from soup
okay so just to recap
we want to show
we have a sequence uh converging to c we
want to show that f of x n converges to
f c
all right another way of stating that is
that this limit of the absolute value
between of the difference between these
two converges to zero that's again a
equivalent way of stating the limit
and you know
in another assignment we proved that for
a sequence of
non-negative numbers or if you like just
for a sequence of numbers
it converges to zero
if and only if the limb soup of the
absolute value converges to zero but
this is a sequence of non-negative
numbers this absolute value of f of x n
minus f of c so this is equivalent to
this
so this thing we want to show
is equivalent to
this thing right below it
now rather than show directly that this
limit limb soup equals 0 we're going to
show that for all epsilon positive it's
less than or equal to that small number
and therefore proving that it's 0
because it's a non-negative number
smaller than
every positive number
okay so
this is our goal to show
this limb soup is less than epsilon
all right so um
let epsilon be positive
um we're now going to prove that that
limb soup is less than epsilon
so first off
let m um be a natural number
such that the sum from
k equals m naught
plus 1
to infinity of 4 to the minus k
is less than
epsilon over 2.
okay so
this series here
right this is a convergent series uh if
i go from k equals zero to infinity
okay
and um
you know we have this koshi criterion
for convergence seek for convergent
series which uh can be equivalently
stated as for all m0 a natural number
there exists
uh or for all epsilon there exist
so first off
okay rather than go through all that we
can actually just compute this
that the left-hand side equals
four to the
um 4 to the minus m naught minus 1
times sum from l equals 0 to infinity 4
to the minus l which equals
four thirds four to the minus m naught
minus one
which equals
one third four to the minus m naught
okay
so if m naught is chosen very large
right this is four to the minus m zero
so this is
i like i can write this as one third
over one fourth
and as long as m zero is chosen very
large i can always make this very small
that's the left side over there so i can
always find an m0
so that this is the case
okay
and now we compute
the limb soup
of f of x in minus f of x
we split this up into two pieces this is
equal to
limb soup
then of
two parts
sum from k equals zero to
m 0 of
cosine of 160 k
x n minus
so
each of these is defined in terms of sum
so i'm going to break the sum up into up
to m 0 and then everything past m 0 this
is equal to
1 over 4
k
times
cosine 160 k
x n minus cosine
160 k x
plus sum from k equals 0 to
m 0 plus 1 to infinity
1 over 4 k
same thing
absolute
value and now
we use the triangle inequality in the
fact that
limb soups preserve inequality so the
absolute value of this thing is less
than or equal to the sum of the absolute
values and the limp soup of those
sequences is less than or equal to the
sum of the limb soups that was another
um
exercise from an assignment or you did
something similar with the limb imp so
this is less than or equal to
limb soup
of
now i use the triangle inequality sum
from
k equals 0 to m 0
4 minus k
cosine 160 k
x of n minus
deer
so i've been writing x i meant to write
c
sorry about that
okay
and then
same thing in
these brackets here
okay
now
see i might keep that
all right so we have that this limb soup
of f of x sub n minus f of c is less
than or equal to the limb soup of this
guy
plus the limb soup of this guy and now
i'm going to use the triangle inequality
again bringing the absolute values
inside
of the the sums which is perfectly valid
even for the infinite sum um
by the same argument i used basically
over there
this is less than or equal to the limb
soup as n goes to infinity of
minus
cosine of
k
c
and
soup
plus
of
sum from k equals m0
plus 1 to infinity of now
the absolute value of
the same thing
okay
now
i applied the triangle inequality to
that
okay
now cosine of anything is always bounded
by one so this is bounded by
first off um
let me come back to this second one m0
is fixed remember this is not changing
with n it's just fixed it depended only
on epsilon okay
um
so m0 is fixed and this is less than or
equal to limb soup
of n now we use
what we know about cosine that cosine of
something minus cosine of something else
is bounded by the difference in the in
the argument so this is bounded by minus
4 to the minus k
times
160 k x n minus
160 k c
plus limb soup of
k equals m0 plus 1
to infinity
4 minus k
times 2 as this is bounded by 1 that's
bounded by 1. now there's no
n left here so this is really just
now equal to that
and we chose m0 so that this quantity
here is less than epsilon over two so
times two this is less than epsilon so
this is
less than or equal to
we're in soup sum from k equals zero to
m
0 of
40 k now again this is just a fixed
number right
the limb soup is in n
yeah
this is just a fixed number times x sub
n
minus c
right the difference in this is just
equal to 160 k times 4 to the minus k
that's 40k
and then
we chose m0 so that this quantity over
here is less than epsilon
and now as n goes to infinity
x sub n is converging to c so this thing
here converges to zero
equals
times
plus epsilon equals epsilon
so
you know to me this is this is a real
first proof of analysis where kind of
you're using everything that you've been
um
exposed to up to this point to prove a
really deep theorem okay so
you know go through this slowly but uh
there's there's you know not too much um
you know the estimates are not all that
tricky once once you have them in front
of you okay so we've shown
that for all epsilon this limb suit is
less than or equal to epsilon because
remember we we ended with epsilon here
but we started off estimating
this limb suit here
okay
now we're in a position to to prove the
final
theorem that we want to prove and this
is due to virus straws
the function
which we've been studying f of x equals
sum from k equals 0 to infinity
cosine
160 k x
over 4 to the k
is nowhere differentiable
okay
all right so you know with everything
we've done so far so we know this
function is continuous right we've
proven that so this example so this
theorem provides you with an example of
a function which is continuous but
nowhere differentiable
and with what we have
on the board
namely you know the key parts are going
to be
what's in that first
theorem there
and there's triangle inequality we have
over here
um
we'll be able to prove this so in fact
let me give myself a little space
and
i'm going to state uh
theorem 2 from over there because i need
some space to write in a minute for all
a b c
the absolute value of a plus b plus c is
bigger than or equal to
a minus
the absolute value of b minus the
absolute value of c
all right
[Applause]
all right so let me uh
let me re-summarize
since i've summarized it already what
we've done up to this point
we've shown that this function here is
well defined absolutely convert the
series is always absolutely convergent
and therefore this function
is bounded and or we also prove that
it's bounded and continuous
right that was the previous theorem
so this function is bounded and
continuous and we're going to prove it's
nowhere differentiable
and again what's the idea the idea is
that we built it out of functions which
are highly oscillatory at smaller and
smaller scales
okay so somehow this function
is highly oscillatory at every scale
okay and if you have a function which is
highly oscillatory of every scale if
some of you have
heard of
you know brownian motion
um
which is a function which is i mean
which is a path which is you know highly
oscillatory
then that function will not be uh
differentiable anywhere
okay
so
proof
let's see be
any real number
and what we're going to do just as in
when we looked at f of x equal the
absolute value of x we're going to
construct
or find a sequence
x of n such that
x of n does not equal c for all n
x n converges to c
and the sequence
f of x sub n minus f of c
over x sub n minus c
in fact is divergent but we'll
go even further
is
unbounded
okay
and therefore the sequence cannot
converge and therefore the function is
not differentiable at c
[Applause]
so
we're going to use theorem 1
to find the sequence
by theorem one
namely part two
for all in a natural number there exists
a x of n
such that
what x sub n is in this interval of the
form so
c plus pi
over
160 n
is less than x is less than
c plus 3 pi
over
160 in
okay
and
cosine of 160 in
x sub n
minus cosine of
160 in c
is bigger than or equal to 1.
okay
so
let me call these two properties a
and b
so
um
another way of writing
a
is we could have instead written
by subtracting c across the board that
x of n minus c is between pi over 160 n
and 3 pi over 160 n
okay so
by a
roll in x of n does not equal to c
because their difference is bounded
below by a positive number
i mean their difference is actually
positive and it's non-zero so
and
by the squeeze theorem
you know again if you like putting the c
on both sides
uh we get that
x sub n converges to c so this will be
our sequence
uh our bad sequence for which the
difference quotient is unbounded
okay
so in fact let me let me write this out
a little bit more
and
x sub n minus c
which is equal to x of n minus c because
this is positive
is less than 3 pi over 160
n
okay
and this goes to zero therefore the
absolute value of x n minus c converges
to zero and therefore x sub n converges
to c
okay
all right
now to lessen the number of times i have
to write cosine 160 k
let fk of x be
cosine 160
kx over 4 to the k
so
f of x is equal to the sum
and k equal to 0 of
of x
all right
and now what we're going to do is we're
going to find a lower bound
on the absolute value of f of x in minus
f of c over x of n minus c
so now
find a lower bound
on
okay
if i can find a lower bound on this
absolute value which is getting large as
large as i wish then that proves that
this
sequence is unbounded and i'm done okay
okay
so
let's look at uh
the absolute value of f of x in
minus f of c
um
let's just write this in in
a few different ways or not a few
different ways but let's split it up as
a sum so all of these guys are equal to
uh
sum of f sub k so i have
the
nth one so remember f sub k this is just
you know one of these building blocks
plus
sum from
k equals 0 to
n
minus 1.
plus
put an x here i meant to write c
okay
and
so uh
i'm going to let
a sub n be this first number
b sub n be the second number
including the sum
and this will be c sub n
so
this is equal to a sub n plus b sub n
plus
c sub n
okay
and now i'm going to use that triangle
inequality i proved
then
f of x
sub n
minus f of c
is greater than or which is equal to
a sub n plus b sub n plus c sub n
is bigger than or equal to
a sub n minus
b sub n minus
c sub n okay
now a sub n this is going to be this is
just the difference between these guys
this is bounded below by one
all right so it's kind of large
not one but uh one over four to the n
these other guys will prove are very
small compared to the a sub n
and then this lower bound this upper
bound we have on x sub n minus c will be
the nail in the coffin as we see so our
goal is now
to estimate from below a sub n remember
we're trying to find a lower bound for
this quantity over x of n minus c so we
need to estimate these things
from below
uh or this
sum from below that means we need to
estimate this from below and then b sub
n and c sub n since they have minus
signs from above
okay um
now
by
b
a sub n which is equal to
4 to the minus n
cosine
160 and x of n minus
cosine 160 to the nc
this is
uh
remember how we chose these
extra bends this is bounded above by
uh
one or bounded below by one so this is
bigger than or equal to four
four to the minus n all right so that's
a sub n
now let's look at how big b sub n is
now we want to bound this from above
because when it hits the minus sign this
will flip the inequality and we'll have
that this will be bounded from below by
something
so the absolute value of b sub n okay
that's equal to
sum from k equals 0 to
n minus 1
of
f k of x of n minus f of c
k of c
and bringing the absolute values inside
by the triangle inequality this is less
than or equal to sum from k equals n
minus 1 of f of f k x sub n minus
f k of c
and now
so this is equal to sum from k equals 0
to
n minus 1 4 to the minus k
cosine 160
k x of n
minus cosine
of 160 k
c
and now we use um
theorem 1 number two
or number one i'm sorry theorem one part
one
so this is
theorem one
one
the difference in these uh is bounded by
160k times the difference in those two
so that's
and now these things we can we can sum
up in closed form well actually x sub n
minus c
uh we proved is less than 3 pi over 160
n
so this is less than uh
sum from
k equals 0 n minus 1
40k
and this equals 3 pi
over 160 n now sum from k equals 0 to n
minus 1 40k we use this formula for
summing a geometric
geometric sum this is equal to
what is this equal to
40 to the n minus 1 over 39.
and
which is less than okay so take away the
one
this is uh one over
thirteen
four to minus n
times pi
right
and
that's less than
pi is less than 4 so
plus one
okay
so
let me summarize this
is less than or equal to
1 over 13
4 minus n plus 1.
now for the last
box this is less the absolute value of c
sub n
absolute value is less than or equal to
um
now we just kind of do a
brutal estimate
we bring the absolute values inside
okay so this is equal so
just as we had before with the b sub n's
except now uh we're summing from k
equals n plus one to infinity we brought
the absolute values inside
and then let's use the triangle
inequality on that this is
remember fk is equal to cosine of 160 k
times x over 4 to the k so that's no
matter what you plug in that's bounded
by 4
1 over 4 to the k
okay
and now this we can actually sum this is
equal to
4 to the minus n minus 1
times sum from
l equals 0 to infinity of 4 to the minus
l
what does this equal
this equals two times four to the minus
n minus one times
four thirds equals two thirds
towards the minus n
okay
so
my board works getting a little shoddy
but um it'll be okay
ie we've proven that the absolute value
of c sub n is bounded by
two thirds
four to the minus n
okay
all right so combining everything that
we've done
we've shown that uh
f of x sub n
minus f of c
which remember is equal is bounded below
by
this is bounded
below by
a sub n remember so the first box is
bounded by four to the minus n
so first off everything
the a sub n's b sub n c sub n so they
all have some
four to the minus n
uh
involved what happened to my estimate
for b oh covering it up
uh four to the minus n so this is
one coming from the a sub n's
and minus uh four over thirteen
coming from the b sub n's
minus
two thirds
coming from the seasons
if you
do the arithmetic this is 4 to the minus
n
1 over 39
okay
so f of x sub n minus f of c is bounded
from below by 4 to the minus n times 1
over 39. now i just divide by
uh x sub n minus c which is bounded
above by 3 pi over 160 in
and therefore when i
take reciprocals i get that
i get that the absolute value of f of x
of n
minus f of c
over x of n
minus c
is bounded from
above
by 1 over x sub n minus c times 4 to the
minus n
1 over 39
which is bounded below by now inserting
this estimate here i get
40 in over
i think that's 117 pi
yes
and therefore the absolute value
of the difference quotient
is bounded below
by 40 to the n over some fixed number
and this thing on the right hand side
is unbounded as in gets
as n varies from one to infinity
and therefore
the absolute value of this difference
quotient is unbounded
which finishes the proof
all right so
you know we've done some things maybe a
few things that you haven't seen in uh
calculus course definitely haven't seen
this most likely
and really this is a first result that
involves you know
a lot of math that we've covered up to
this point to prove a very
you know non-trivial and
you know
deep theorem that uh
that
differentiability is is um a bit of a
miracle okay
it's a miracle when it happens okay
we'll stop there